The Music is in Your Brain
Joel Deerwester, 2024-05-08


Over his lifetime, J.S. Bach wrote over a thousand compositions but likely many more, a large number of which were lost after his death when his estate was divided among his surviving family members, some allotments regrettably receiving less care than others. Most of his surviving artistic output was in the service of his various employers, whether the secular Anhalt-Köthen court or his directorship of the Collegium Musicum (with the famously associated performances at the Café Zimmermann), or the religious St. Thomas School and various churches. While many of his most enduring works like the Orchestral Suites, the imperishable B Minor Mass, or St Matthew Passion were written at the employ of court or church, it is more likely that anyone born without first-person memories of the news of Watergate or the Vietnam War years will more readily recognize the C Major Prelude from the Well-Tempered Clavier, the Minuet from the G Minor suite BWV 822, the Musette from English Suite No. 3, and a mass of other hummable examples from Suzuki, Alfred, or any other publisher of piano methods. In fact, at least a fifth of his surviving work was written for keyboard, not including his organ compositions. And of these, the majority were either explicitly written as keyboard exercises—volume four of Clavier-Übung, literally “keyboard practice”, is the immediately recognizable Goldberg Variations—or musical workings-out of theoretical ideas. Bach’s Clavier-Büchlein, ‘keyboard booklet’ written for his eldest son contains another collection of these, the Inventions and Sinfonias of which the first C Major invention counts itself a member of, at least, the Suzuki Method’s pages and, I would bet any sum of money, almost any other “piano method”.

In his employment as director of music in various courts and churches, Bach taught music throughout, and these musical specimens are examples of Bach’s method of teaching music to his pupils, often his own children, as in the case of the Clavier-Büchlein for Wilhelm Friedemann Bach. He used the Inventions of the Clavier-Büchlein as exercises in digital mastery of the keyboard, examples of the development of idea, and lessons in counterpoint. He used the Well-Tempered Clavier as a study of music in all twenty-four major and minor keys and the elaboration of musical ideas in the formally freer preludes contrasted with the stricter contrapuntal fugues that follow. In all cases, Bach’s way of teaching music was through music. He undoubtedly paid close attention to current music theory, studied works like Johann Joseph Fux’s treatise on how to handle composition for multiple voices, Gradus Ad Parnassum, and engaged with music as a scientific discipline to be studied, explored, and understood. We don’t know how much attention Bach’s students were made to pay to scales and arpeggios, but from what we can tell, their musical education never strayed far from music itself as the primary medium.

In a recent and fascinating interview with David Reed titled ‘The Music is in You’ hosted by an old high school classmate of mine, Josh Kidwell, a number of interesting questions about music education come up. David Reed has run Improvise for Real, an online music education program whose design is to help people who are not music theory, scales, and arpeggios inclined “express your own musical ideas exactly as you hear them in your mind”. His idea is for students to learn music through creating music rather than through diligent study of scales, modes, harmony, and theoretical mumbo jumbo. This has been an idea that has long resonated with me. I grew up on the Suzuki Method but found more joy in just ‘playing’—I remember stubbornly insisting that my parents ask me to ‘play’ rather than ‘practice piano’ for thirty minutes daily. While I was working my way through the Suzuki books, my mom would play the accompanying cassette tape in my bedroom as I went to sleep. The following day, I would learn to play whatever piece was on the menu ‘by ear’ to the frustration of Mrs. Tiao, my piano teacher who I could never fool into thinking I was actually reading the notes on the page. Anyway, I managed to work my way through books one through six this way and only became proficient at reading music once I started playing the trumpet in middle school.
